TWENTY FOURTH MEETING ARIANNA,
EVERY INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY
POLICE OVERSIGHT COMMISSION TO
ORDER.
I'M GOING TO ASK
MR. CUMMINS TO
PLEASE CALL THE ROLL COUNCIL
MEMBERS HERE.
>> COMMISSIONER OSMAN.
>> COMMISSIONER BILLUPS CHAIR
CARTER YOU COMMISSIONER THEM
HERE.
>> COMMISSIONER PIPKINS COUNCIL
MEMBER HARRISON.
COMMISSIONER BAREBONE
COMMISSIONER GREEN HERE.
COMMISSIONER HAYNES HERE.
COMMISSIONER ELKIN HERE.
COMMISSIONER FRANCIS HERE WE
HAVE THANK YOU COMMISSIONERS
WHEN YOU DO SPEAK.
JUST A REMINDER PLEASE SPEAK
INTO THE MIKE.
COULD YOU DO THE OTHER
RESOLUTION?
>> I HAVEN'T SAID OK, WHATEVER
YOU WANT TO TAKE A MINUTE AND
LOOK AT THE AGENDA AND THEN I'M
GOING TO ASK FOR ONE OF THE
COMMISSIONERS TO MAKE A MOTION
TO APPROVE THE AGENDA
FOR
ANYONE.
HAS THE AGENDA BEEN CHANGED
SINCE THE LAST TIME IT WENT UP?
>> I HAVE TO SAY IT'S THE SAME
THING.
OK, I MOVE TO APPROVE THE
AGENDA.
IS THERE A SECOND?
THANK YOU.
>> AND YOU HAVE I THINK IN
FRONT OF YOU THE MINUTES FROM
THE LAST MEETING WHICH WAS OUR
PUBLIC FORUM ON SEPTEMBER
TWENTY SEVEN.
>> DO I HAVE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE MINUTES?
>> THIS IS COMMISSIONER HAYNES
I SO MOVE TO APPROVE THE
MINUTES.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE A SECOND SECOND ALL IN
FAVOR.
ALL IN FAVOR OF ANY OPPOSED.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THE AGENDA IS THE MINUTES ARE
APPROVED.
>> NOW IS THE TIME FOR PUBLIC
COMMENT.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY ONE WHO IS ON
THE.
WE HAVE NO ONE ON THE PHONE FOR
PUBLIC COMMENT.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE HERE FOR
PUBLIC COMMENT AND ONE HERE FOR
REPUBLICANS?
>> VERY GOOD.
>> THANK YOU.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON SO
REPORT FROM THE CHAIR.
THE FIRST THING I WANT TO DO IS
WELCOME OUR NEW COMMISSIONER.
WE HAVE WE WERE GOING TO HAVE A
FULL COMPLEMENT
OF COMMISSIONERS FOR EVERYONE
TO MEET COMMISSIONER ELLIS LIKE
A AND I KNEW THAT THIS IS YOUR
FIRST MEETING.
>> YOU WERE YOU WERE OUT.
>> WE ARE SO HAPPY TO HAVE YOU
WITH ONE.
TAKE JUST A MINUTE AND
INTRODUCE YOURSELF.
TELL US ABOUT YOURSELF.
>> VERY GOOD.
MY NAME IS NEIL ALIKHAN.
I LIVE HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
I'VE LIVED HERE FOR SINCE 1984.
I HAVE TWO CHILDREN BOTH
PRODUCTS OF THE ANN ARBOR
PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM.
I AM A RETIRED SPECIAL
EDUCATION ADMINISTRATOR WHO I
WORKED FOR THE LAST NIGHT
INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL DISTRICT
FOR 35 YEARS.
I AM A FORMER MEMBER OF THE
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION HERE IN
ANN ARBOR AND I'M HAPPILY
RETIRED AND LOOKING FORWARD TO
WORKING WITH THE COMMISSION IN
THE COMMUNITY.
THANK YOU.
WE CERTAINLY LOOK FORWARD TO
HAVING YOU WORK WITH US AND
THEN WE HAVE OUR NEW
COMMISSIONER COMMISSIONER JUST
FRANCE AND FRANCE AS I KNEW
THERE WHO WAS JUST APPROVED BY
COUNCIL A WEEK OR SO AGO AND WE
WELCOME YOU, COMMISSIONER
FRANCES, CAN YOU GIVE US A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT YOURSELF?
>> SURE.
THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME AND I'M
VERY EXCITED TO BE HERE.
JAMES FRANCIS I WORK AT THE
INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH
AS A RESEARCHER AND I MOVED TO
ANN ARBOR IN 20/20 JANUARY
2020.
SO QUITE THE TIME TO MAKE A
CHANGE IN THE TIME THAT I LIVED
IN ANN ARBOR I HAD THE GREAT
FORTUNE OF HAVING AN AMAZING
FRIEND AND NEXT DOOR NEIGHBOR
AND JUDE WALTON WHO SERVED ON
THIS COMMITTEE AND HELPED
ESTABLISH A LOT OF GREAT THINGS
IN OUR COMMUNITY.
SHE HAD TOLD ME AT ONE POINT IF
YOU WANT TO GET INVOLVED IN THE
CITY YOU SHOULD JOIN THIS
COMMISSION AND DO SOME GOOD.
AND SO THAT'S WHY I'M HERE.
I LOOK FORWARD TO WORKING WITH
YOU ALL AND FURTHERING THE WORK
THAT SHE STARTED.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
AND WE UNDERSTAND THAT
COMMISSIONER WALTON WAS
INSTRUMENTAL IN YOUR INTEREST
IN NICK PARK AND WE APPRECIATE
THAT AND WE ALSO UNDERSTAND
THAT YOU WRITE GRANTS.
I DO AND SO WE'RE LOOKING
FORWARD TO TO THAT SCALE.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
AND I KNOW THAT COMMISSIONER
OFMAN INDICATED THAT HE WAS
ABLE HE WILL NOT BE HERE SO WE
OF COURSE WISH HIM WELL.
HMM.
AND COMMISSIONER GREENE WAS NOT
ABLE TO JOIN US LAST TIME.
THIS IS YOUR FIRST MEETING.
YES.
THANK YOU IS SO GOOD TO HAVE
YOU.
WOULD YOU INTRODUCE YOURSELF TO
US PLEASE?
>> THANK YOU MADAM CHAIR.
I'M ROBERT GREENE.
I'M AN ATTORNEY.
I PASSED IN THE NEW HOPE
BAPTIST CHURCH IN ANN ARBOR.
I'M A FORMER ASSISTANT
PROSECUTING ATTORNEY FOR COUNTY
.
I'VE ALSO DONE A DEFENSE WORK
FOR 40 YEARS BUT I'M NOT THAT
OLD BUT I APPRECIATE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO WORK ON THIS
IMPORTANT COMMITTEE.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
WE ARE SO GLAD TO HAVE YOU.
I KNOW COMMISSIONER GREENE IS
GOING TO BE HAS I THINK AGREED
TO WORK ON THE POLICY COMMITTEE
AND I KNOW I KNOW COMMISSIONER
MILLER I'M HAPPY TO HEAR THAT
AND COMMISSIONER ALIKHAN I
THINK IS GOING TO BE WORKING ON
THE TRAINING TRAINING TRAINING
SUBCOMMITTEE AND I THINK
COMMISSIONER FRANCIS IS GOING
TO BE WORK OUTREACH.
VERY GOOD.
WE WE APPRECIATE VERY MUCH
APPRECIATE HAVING A FULL
COMPLEMENT OF COMMISSIONERS.
AGAIN, WE'RE AT 10 WE WE ARE
STILL LOOKING FOR A YOUTH
MEMBER.
>> SO IF THERE'S ANYONE WHO
KNOWS A COLLEGE STUDENT OR EVEN
A REALLY GOOD HIGH SCHOOL
SENIOR, THAT'S A ONE YEAR TERM
AND WE WE VERY MUCH WOULD
APPRECIATE HAVING THAT MEMBER
TO ROUND OUT OUR COMMISSION.
>> OK, SO COUPLE OF THINGS THAT
I WANT TO TALK ABOUT THIS
EVENING.
FIRST OF ALL, I MET WITH AS A
MATTER OF FACT COMMISSIONER
MILGRIM AND I MET WITH THE
INCOMING INTERIM CHIEF LAST
WEEK.
>> WE FIRST OF ALL I WENT TO
THE RECEPTION FOR THE OUTGOING
INTERIM CHIEF AND WE MET WITH
THE INCOMING INTERIM CHIEF AND
I WAS INFORMED BY THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR THAT THERE'S
GOING TO BE LAST TIME THEY HAD
THE SEARCH SO MANY OF US WERE I
WAS OUT OF TOWN, SEVERAL OF US
WERE OUT OF TOWN.
IT WAS THE MIDDLE OF THE
SUMMER.
THEY DO WANT TO HAVE A PANEL TO
PRESENT OUR QUESTIONS TO THE
CANDIDATES AND WE CAN HAVE A
PANEL OF OUR OWN.
THERE'LL BE SEVERAL PANELS AND
RIGHT NOW THE DATES THAT I'VE
BEEN GIVEN ARE NOVEMBER 30TH
AND DECEMBER 1ST EITHER OR I'M
NOT SURE THAT THAT THEY HAVE
SETTLED ON A ON A DATE.
SO HOPEFULLY ISN'T ANYBODY NOW
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SERVE ON THAT
PANEL?
>> YEAH, COMMISSIONER, I SERVED
ON PREVIOUSLY AND I'VE COME TO
ME WITH SOME SORT OF AN
EXCELLENT AND COMMISSIONER
ALIKHAN AND COMMISSIONER I JUST
WANT TO CALL YOU YES I AM
REALLY CENCOM YOU KNOW I DON'T
WANT I DON'T WANT TO DO THAT.
SO MARCU KIND OF PUT A HOLD ON
THOSE TWO DATES AND I'LL LET
YOU KNOW FOR SURE WHEN THE DATE
IS DECIDED AND EVEN IF YOU
CANNOT ATTEND IF YOU WOULD COME
UP WITH YOUR QUESTIONS, WE NEED
TO HAVE A WHOLE SET
OF QUESTIONS THAT WILL BE
ASKING AS A PANEL AND AND I I
ASKED IF WE HAD TO HAVE OUR
QUESTIONS CLEARED THROUGH THE
CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE AND I
WAS TOLD WELL IT WOULD BE A
GOOD IDEA NOT THAT THEY ARE
TRYING TO MONITOR OUR QUESTIONS
BUT IF THERE ARE SOME THINGS
THAT MIGHT POSSIBLY RUN AFOUL
OF THINGS WE CAN'T ASK, WE WANT
TO MAKE SURE THAT THAT WE CLEAR
THAT WE'RE ASKING QUESTIONS FOR
SURE.
PARDON MY IGNORANCE, BUT HAVE
THE NEW CHIEF BEEN SELECTED
ALREADY?
>> NO.
OK, NO, THEY'RE STARTING AS I
UNDERSTAND IT, FRESH.
THERE WERE SEVERAL CANDIDATES
LAST TIME AND NONE OF THEM WERE
SELECTED.
OK, SO THEY STARTED NEW FRESH
START AND FRESH I THINK THEY
HAVE I UNDERSTAND THEY HAVE
FOUR CANDIDATES I DON'T KNOW
ANY OUR INTERNAL OR NOT.
>> SO I HAVE A QUESTION.
SO ARE WE ASKING THESE
QUESTIONS OF EACH ONE OF THESE
CANDIDATES?
>> YES.
OK, YEAH.
THEY'LL BE THE SAME SAME SET
OF QUESTIONS WILL ASK
TO EACH
ONE.
OK, YES.
OK SO AGAIN PUT THAT ON YOUR
CALENDAR AND I'LL LET YOU KNOW
FOR SURE WHICH OF THOSE TWO
DATES IS SELECTED AGAIN WE HAVE
COMMITTEES NOW AND I KNOW MISS
CUMMINGS HAS BEEN IN TOUCH WITH
PRETTY MUCH EVERYBODY TO TRY
AND SET UP DATES, TIMES.
I THINK MOST OF THE COMMITTEE
MEETINGS ARE GOING TO BE ON
ZOOME OR TEAMS OR SOMETHING
LIKE THAT SO WE DON'T HAVE TO
COME OUT.
I'LL PROBABLY TRY AND JOIN YOU
AT LEAST AT THE BEGINNING ON
ALL OF THE COMMITTEES AND GET
US GOING AND I DO APPRECIATE
COMMITTEE WORK.
THAT'S HOW WE GET OUR WORK DONE
AND SO THANK YOU FOR EVERYBODY
WHO HAS WHO HAS SIGNED UP AND
AGAIN WE ARE CHARGE IF YOU GET
A CHANCE YOU'LL MAKE SURE YOU
READ THROUGH OUR BYLAWS AND OUR
ORDINANCE THAT SET UP A PAC
THINGS WE'RE SUPPOSED TO DO.
ONE OF THE THINGS WE'RE
SUPPOSED TO DO IS PROVIDE A
YEAR END REPORT AND SO EVEN IF
YOUR COMMITTEE HASN'T DONE MUCH
BECAUSE WE'RE STARTING LATE IN
THE YEAR THE YEAR END REPORT
CAN GIVE A PREVIEW OF WHAT
WE'RE PLANNING TO DO FOR THE
NEXT YEAR THAT WE HAVE MET,
THAT WE'RE MEETING, THAT WE'RE
GETTING THINGS GOING.
SO PLEASE BE LOOKING AT THAT AS
WE GET INTO OUR COMMITTEE
MEETINGS.
I WANT TO TALK A LITTLE BIT
BECAUSE SOME OF YOU MAY BE
ASKING ALL OF US NEED TO KNOW
ONE OF THE MAIN THINGS THAT WE
DO IS REVIEW POLICE COMPLAINTS
NOW IN THE PACKET THAT YOU HAVE
THAT MISS CUMMINGS HAS HAS
HANDED EVERYBODY THERE'S SORT
OF A LOW FLOW CHART SUMMARY AND
I SAY SUMMARY BECAUSE
COMMISSIONER OFMAN HAS PUT
TOGETHER A SLIDE PRESENTATION
AND HE'S GOING TO BUT
UNFORTUNATELY HE'S NOT ABLE TO
BE HERE TODAY AND WE'RE GOING
TO GO THROUGH THAT NEXT WEEK.
SO NEXT MONTH SO EVERYONE KNOW
IN MORE DETAIL HOW THE
COMPLAINT PROCESS GOES.
BUT THIS FLOW SHEET THAT'S IN
YOUR PACKET SHOWS BASICALLY
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE
COMPLAINTS COME IN IS EVERYBODY
LOOKING AT THAT REAL QUICK SO
COMPLAINTS CAN COME IN EITHER
TO XPATH.
>> DO YOU HAVE YOUR COMPLAINTS
CAN CAN COME IN TO IG PARK AND
THEY WOULD GO RIGHT TO OUR
OFFICE.
MY COMMENT WILL RECEIVE THEM.
THEY CAN COME IN BY PHONE OR BY
EMAIL OR HOW THE CITIZEN WANTS
TO FILE THE COMPLAINT.
WE CANNOT DO ANYTHING WITH
REGARD TO COMPLAINTS UNTIL THE
POLICE HAVE ALREADY PROCESSED
IT AND SO IF WE IF IT COMES IN
TO A PARK IT GOES WE SEND IT
DIRECTLY TO THE POLICE.
IF IT COMES IN THROUGH THE
POLICE THEN THEY DO THEIR
INVESTIGATION FIRST.
THEN THEY INVESTIGATE AND MAKE
A DETERMINATION AND THEY FALL
WITH THE PACKET TO O'CLOCK WHEN
WE MET WITH THE INCOMING
INTERIM CHIEF LAST WEEK WE WERE
LOOKING AT THE CONTRACT A NEW
CONTRACT FOR THE COMMAND
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION AND AND
THAT WAS SET UP THE SAME AS THE
POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION.
THERE'S A 30 DAY WINDOW AND
HOPEFULLY THEY CAN DO IT IN
THIRTY DAYS.
THAT'S IT'S NOT IN STONE BUT
THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO GET THEIR
INVESTIGATION DONE IN THIRTY
DAYS AFTER THAT THEY PASS IT ON
TO ECHO PARK.
OUR INFORMATION MANAGERS WILL
LOOK AT IT AND START THEIR
REVIEW AND THEN THE AND WHOEVER
IS ASSIGNED THE THE THE
COMPLAINT ONCE THEY DO COMPLETE
THEIR REVIEW IT GOES TO
COMMISSIONER OFMAN WHO IS THE
CHAIR OF THE INFORMATION
MANAGERS HE LOOKS AT OVER AND
THEN THEY REPORT IT OUT TO US
AND WE WILL APPROVE IN GENERAL
I CAN'T SEE WHY WE WOULDN'T
APPROVE WHAT'S BEEN REVIEWED BY
THE INFORMATION MANAGERS.
WE APPROVE WHAT THEY HAVE DONE
AND THEN WE PASS THAT FINAL
DECISION ON TO THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT, TO THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR AND TO THE
COMPLAINANT WHO IS OFFERED AN
OPPORTUNITY TO COME AND TALK TO
US AND I THINK THAT'S A STEP WE
HADN'T LOOKED AT BEFORE.
GO AHEAD, COMMISSIONER GREEN.
NO, THIS IS A COMPLAINT BY
SOMEONE WHO IS UNHAPPY WITH
SOMETHING THE POLICE HAVE DONE.
YES.
OK, YES.
ALL RIGHT.
OR OR NOT DONE RIGHT, RIGHT.
RIGHT.
OK, SO AGAIN WHAT WHO'S GOT A
HAND?
I'M SORRY.
SO WHEN THE WHEN THE COMPLAINT
COMES IN AND GOES TO THE POLICE
THE POLICE DOES YOUR
INVESTIGATION AND EVENTUALLY IT
COMES TO US RIGHT.
DO DO WE AS A COMMISSION HAVE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO TO ASK
QUESTIONS AS TO WHY THE POLICE
HAVE COME TO A CERTAIN
CONCLUSION?
YES, AND DO AND CAN WE MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS ON POSSIBLY
WHAT WE MIGHT THINK IS
ABSOLUTELY OK SO WE DON'T HAVE
TO JUST TAKE THAT AND SAY OK,
ESSENTIALLY AND PASS IT ON.
WE HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO ASK
SOME QUESTIONS AND MAKE SOME
DECISIONS IF WE THINK THAT
OTHER DECISIONS NEED TO BE MADE
AND WE HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
HEAR FROM THE ACTUAL
COMPLAINANT AS WELL.
THAT'S RIGHT.
WE'RE NOT JUST A RUBBER STAMP
RIGHT.
AND WHEN WE GET THE PACKAGE
THAT WE GET THE PACKET THAT WE
GET FROM THE POLICE, I DON'T
THINK I DON'T THINK THAT I
ASKED MISS CUMMINS TO INCLUDE
WHAT WHAT WE GET FROM THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
>> IT'LL SAY WHAT THE INVEST
WHAT THE COMPLAINT WAS, WHETHER
THERE WERE ANY SPECIFIC
POLICIES OR PROCEDURES THAT
WERE VIOLATED, WHAT
INVESTIGATION THEY DID, WHO
THEY TALKED TO.
>> NORMALLY THERE'S GOING TO BE
SOME BODYCAM FOOTAGE THAT THEY
LOOK AT AND WHAT THEY BASICALLY
WHY WHAT THEIR RECOMMENDATION
IS AND WHY.
AND SO WE WE HAVE THAT
INFORMATION NOW.
I HAVE TO HAVE TO BACK UP FOR
ONE MINUTE BECAUSE THE
ORDINANCE SAYS WE CAN HAVE UP
TO FIVE INFORMATION MANAGERS.
THE INFORMATION MANAGERS ARE
THE ONES WHO CAN REVIEW THE
BODY CAM FOOTAGE.
LOOK AT ALL THE LOOK AT
EVERYTHING THAT THE POLICE HAVE
LOOKED AT BECAUSE BECAUSE
OF REASONS OF PRIVACY AND THIS
IS SOMETHING WE MIGHT WANT TO
LOOK AT LATER TO MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS BACK TO COUNCIL
THAT HEY, WE NEED MORE THAN
JUST FIVE PEOPLE.
BUT THAT'S RIGHT NOW WHAT THE
ORDINANCE SAYS WE CAN HAVE FIVE
INFORMATION MANAGERS AND WHO
ARE THOSE INFORMATION
COMMISSIONER OFMAN OK,
COMMISSIONER PIPKINS
COMMISSIONER BILLUPS AND AND
BASICALLY I ONCE I TOOK OVER
THE CHAIR I HAD STOPPED
REVIEWING COMPLAINTS BUT I
WANTED TO KEEP THE DESIGNATION
SO THAT IF NECESSARY I COULD
LOOK AT ONE.
>> SO WE ACTUALLY HAVE AN
OPENING PLACE FOR FIFTH
INFORMATION MANAGER IF SOMEONE
WOULD LIKE TO DO THAT WORK THEY
MEET HOW OFTEN MISS COMMENTS
ONCE ONCE A MONTH AND THAT'S
ALSO WHEN WE HAVE A SCHEDULED
MEETING WE'RE STILL WAITING BUT
IT WILL BE ON ZOOME SO IF YOU
HAVE A TIME THAT'S YOU KNOW
THAT TAKES SOME TIME TO REVIEW
THE COMPLAINTS COME IN AND
SOMETIMES THERE ARE THERE HAVE
BEEN HOURS OF FOOTAGE YOU KNOW
TO REVIEW IF YOU HAVE A COUPLE
OF POLICE OFFICERS TO SHOW UP
AND WHATEVER HAPPENS TAKES A
COUPLE HOURS.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF THE POLICE
CAMERA FOOTAGE THAT IS
POSSIBLE.
>> BUT IF SOMEBODY WANTS TO DO
THAT PLEASE LET ME KNOW BECAUSE
YOU KNOW, WE ARE IN A SITUATION
NOW WITH THE FUI YEARS SINCE WE
HAVE COME INTO BEING ORGANIZED.
>> WE'VE HAD A LOT OF WORK
THAT'S BEEN DONE BY THE
PREVIOUS YEAR AND THE PREVIOUS
COMMISSIONERS GETTING OURSELVES
ESTABLISHED AND AS A RESULT WE
HAVE A BACKLOG OF COMPLAINTS.
YEAH, WE DO.
>> AND WHAT WE AND SOME OF THEM
HAVE BEEN REVIEWING BUT WE
HAVEN'T YET FORMALLY COME UP
WITH OUR RECOMMENDATIONS.
SO THERE'S SOMEBODY WANTS TO
HELP ON THAT NOW BY THE WAY,
LOOK AT THERE'S A DOCUMENT
THAT'S IN YOUR PACKET ALSO
.
OK, ALL RIGHT.
ALL RIGHT, ALL RIGHT.
LET'S START WITH ALL RIGHT,
LET'S LET'S DO THIS FORMALLY
THEN BECAUSE WE NEED TO LOOK AT
THIS AND ADOPT IT IF IF WE WANT
.
>> SO THERE'S THREE DOCUMENTS.
ONE OF THEM SAYS ANAPRA
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY HAS HAS
OUR LOGO AT THE AND IT'S REALLY
OF THE SEPTEMBER EIGHT ONE THIS
RIGHT.
RIGHT, RIGHT, RIGHT.
BUT I MEAN OK, LET'S LOOK AT
RIGHT.
THE ONE AT THE TOP.
BUT I MEAN OK, LET'S LOOK AT
>> IT SAYS OCTOBER 18TH
BE
HERE.
SO WE'LL TALK ABOUT IT NOW.
OK, SO THIS IS THE LETTER THAT
GOES OUT FROM OUR OFFICE TO THE
COMPLAINANT AND BASICALLY THANK
YOU FOR FILING A COMPLAINT.
IT EXPLAINS WHAT HAPPENS AFTER
YOU FILE A COMPLAINT AND I LOOK
FORWARD TO ASSISTING AND I'M
GOING TO THIS LET'S JUST LOOK
AT THEM FIRST.
I WILL GIVE YOU A MINUTE TO
READ OVER THEM THE NEXT ONE
SEPTEMBER A TELLS THE
COMPLAINANT THAT COMPLAINT
REVIEW IS FINISHED ALL RIGHT
AND IT TELLS THEM WHAT THEY CAN
DO.
>> THEY HAVE A RIGHT TO COME
AND TALK TO US IF NEED BE AND
THEN THE THIRD ONE IS A DRAFT
OF THE REPORT THAT WE WILL BE
FILING FOR EACH COMPLAINT AND
THIS THIS IS THE STEP THAT WE
STILL HAVE A BACKLOG FOR DOING
IS IS GETTING THESE FINAL
REPORT DONE FOR THOSE
COMPLAINTS THAT HAVE BEEN
REVIEWED ALREADY.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WOULD YOU TAKE A FEW
MINUTES, READ OVER AND LET'S
BEFORE WE CAN ACTUALLY BEGIN
USING THEM, I'D LIKE US ALL TO
LOOK AT THEM AND FORMALLY ADOPT
THEM
.
WHAT WHAT WHAT HAPPENS IF WE
DON'T
?
>> I'VE BEEN INFORMED THAT I'M
NOT FOLLOWING PROCEDURE SO THE
AGENDA SAYS THAT WE'RE SUPPOSED
TO TALK ABOUT THIS UNDER
INFORMATION MANAGERS COMMITTEE
REPORT.
OK, BUT SINCE COMMISSIONER
OFMAN IS NOT GOING TO BE HERE
FOR THAT REPORT, I'M GOING TO
MOVE THAT WE WILL SOMETHING
TERRIBLE WILL HAPPEN IF WE
DON'T WE'RE THAT OF THE THE
REVIEW OF THE ATTACHMENTS.
OK, UP TO THE CHAIR REPORT I
SECOND THAT MOTION.
>> THANK YOU.
ANY ANY POST ALL IN FAVOR I
THERE WE GO.
SO NOW LET'S TAKE A FEW MINUTES
AND LOOK AT THESE DOCUMENTS.
>> SOMETHING'S GOING TO HAPPEN
TO ME IF I MESS UP AND WE'D
LIKE TO GET THEM APPROVED THIS
EVENING OK GOT TO MAKE SURE WE
DO THIS
HERE TO KNOW I DID GOOD
.
OK OK YOU GOT TO CHANGE.
I'M SEEING YOU GUYS.
WERE YOU OK WITH
JUST THE ONLY
ONE.
OK GOOD.
WHAT IS IT.
WELL YOU CAN TELL IT'S NOT OK.
YEAH I'LL KEEP IT JUST ONE
OFFICIAL ONE CAN YOU DO THAT.
IT GOT TO DO IT SO
YES
COUNCILPERSONS SO I HAVE A
QUESTION IN THE RESPONSE THE
PROCESS OK WHAT AND I DON'T I
DON'T SEE THE SUN FLOWCHART
EITHER BUT AT WHAT POINT WILL
IT COME UNDER COUNCIL REVIEW IS
IT WELL COMPLAINTS COME AS A
BATCH AS PART OF THE MONTHLY
REPORT WHEN YOU COME TO COUNCIL
AT THE BEGINNING OF THE MONTH
OR IS IT UP TO LIAISON'S TO
BRING THE KIND OF UPDATE OUR
COUNCIL COLLEAGUES COMPLAINTS
AND PROCESS?
I'M JUST TRYING TO LIKE IT
WON'T COME UP FOR COUNCIL VOTE.
I KNOW I UNDERSTAND THAT BUT I
GUESS WHAT I'M TRYING TO
UNDERSTAND IS AT WHAT POINT
WILL THERE BE SOME YOU KNOW,
WILL THE REPORTS TO STAY WITHIN
CITY ADMINISTRATION OR WILL
EVER COME UP AND BUBBLE UP TO
COUNCIL OUTSIDE OF THE
LIAISON'S HERE?
YOU KNOW, IT'S NOT PART OF THE
PROCESS THAT WE'VE OUTLINED BUT
I'M TRYING TO THINK BACK TO
WHAT THE ORDINANCE SAYS IT SAYS
WHAT DOES IT SAY WE REPORT TO
COUNCIL OR THE OTHER MAYOR?
>> I DON'T I DON'T REMEMBER.
YEAH, WE CAN CHECK.
WE CAN CHECK AND SEE.
DO YOU THINK COUNCIL WOULD WANT
THAT AS PART OF OUR REPORT
EVERY MONTH?
I THINK IT WOULD BE HELPFUL.
WE'VE HAD A SERIES OF WORK
SESSIONS THIS MONTH.
WE'VE HAD A MEETING EVERY
MONDAY FOR US.
WE'VE BEEN BEEN IN THESE
CHAMBERS EVERY MONDAY FOR THE
PAST FIVE WEEKS AND WE JUST HAD
ONE LAST NIGHT ON HOUSING AND
HOMELESSNESS.
WE HAD ANOTHER ONE IN THE DENHA
IT MIGHT BE THAT HELPS US
PREPARE FOR THE BUDGET BUDGET
CYCLE SO AND THEN YOU KNOW, IF
IF WE HAD A NUMBER OF ISSUES
WITH POLICE COMPLAINTS IT WOULD
HELP US ALSO IT WOULD ALSO HELP
INFORM US ON WHAT WE EXPECT IN
THE INTERVIEW PROCESS FOR THE
CHIEF TO TO SOME POINT MAYBE
THIS BODY CAN KIND OF CONSIDER
HOW YOU WOULD LIKE TO PACKAGE
UP YOUR REVIEWS FOR COUNCIL SO
THAT DOESN'T JUST STAY WITHIN
CITY STAFF IN CITY
ADMINISTRATION.
I CAN'T SEE WHY WE CAN'T PASS
THAT INFORMATION ON TO COUNCIL
.
I FORESEE US COMING UP WITH AT
THE END OF EACH MONTH HOW MANY
COMPLAINTS AND WE REALLY DON'T
GENERALLY HAVE A LOT
OF COMPLAINTS EVERY MONTH YOU
KNOW, MAYBE THREE OR FOUR,
SOMETIMES SIX THAT KIND
OF THING.
I DON'T KNOW IF WE WILL BE
REPORTING OUT THE COMPLAINANTS
NAME BUT WE GET WE HAVE A
NUMBER THAT WILL ASSIGN SO IT
BECOMES PUBLIC.
>> BUT I CAN CERTAINLY TALK
WITH THE INFORMATION MANAGERS
ABOUT THAT.
>> BUT ONCE WE ONCE WE GET THE
REPORTS THERE, I DON'T SEE A
REASON WHY WE CAN'T THE SAME
REPORT THAT WE SEND TO THE
POLICE CHIEF AND THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR WE CAN PASS ON TO
COUNCIL.
>> THAT MAKES SENSE TO
EVERYONE.
I MEAN IT'S FEASIBLE IT'S NO
IT'S IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN.
>> I BUT WE SHOULD FIND A
PROCESS WHERE COUNCIL CAN AT
LEAST PUT SOME EYES ON IT
BEFOREHAND.
I KNOW A COUNCIL PERSON IS IS
VERY MINDFUL ABOUT SHARING WHAT
WE TALK ABOUT HERE WITH THE
BODY.
BUT SINCE WE HAVEN'T REALLY
BEEN WORKING ON RESOLUTIONS
OUTSIDE OF THE TRAFFIC AND THE
SECONDARY TRAFFIC ORDINANCE, IT
MIGHT BE ANOTHER WAY TO INFORM
OUR COLLEAGUES ABOUT THE WORK
THAT'S BEING DONE HERE.
>> IT WILL CERTAINLY BE IN OUR
IN OUR YEARLY REPORT BUT I'LL
BRING IT UP AT THE NEXT
INFORMATION MANAGERS MEETING
AND WE CAN ADD THAT TO THE
PROCESS.
I DON'T SEE WHY WE CAN'T AT THE
END WHEN WE SEND OUR
NOTIFICATION TO THE ARNAB
POLICE TO THE CITY ADMINISTER
GREATER AND I DON'T KNOW WHY WE
CAN'T ADD COUNCIL BUT WE'LL
WE'LL CERTAINLY JUST FOR
REFERENCE, YOU KNOW, ONE OF THE
ISSUES THAT CAME UP LAST NIGHT
IS IN OUR WORK WITH THE COUNTY
AND THE OFFICE OF COMMUNITY AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND WITH
OUR HOUSING PARTNERS SOME
OF THE DENHA TASK FORCE, YOU
KNOW, IN TIME COUNTS FOR OUR
HOMELESSNESS, OUR HOMELESS
POPULATION AND THAT'S DONE
EVERY END OF JANUARY AND IT'S
CALLED THE BIG PICTURE.
I CAN'T REMEMBER POINT IN POINT
IN TIME COUNT AND I SAID IT
WOULD BE INTERESTING IF WE
COULD GET A KIND OF MORE
REGULAR UPDATES ON OUR
HOMELESSNESS DATA JUST SO THAT
WE CAN IF WE HAVE TO DO BUDGET
AMENDMENTS FOR EVICTION
PREVENTION OR REHOUSING.
SO I JUST WANT TO BE MORE
RESPONSIVE, YOU KNOW, AND IF IT
IF THE BUDGET ISN'T RESPONSIVE
TO HELPING PEOPLE OR YOU KNOW,
IF WE'RE NOT YOU KNOW, WE
SHOULDN'T HAVE TO WAIT FOR A
YEAR TO BE RESPONSIVE ON HOW WE
WORK WITH OUR POLICE, THEN TELL
US WHAT KIND OF DATA YOU WANT
TO GIVE TO US AND YOU KNOW WE
DON'T HAVE TO JUST LEAVE IT TO
KEVIN KARPIAK TO PRESENT OR
HAVE A STUDY ABOUT WE CAN WE
CAN CERTAINLY LOOK AT THAT AND
I DON'T SEE WHY WE CAN'T MAKE
THAT REPORT AS WELL.
AND AGAIN, SEE WE'RE SO BEHIND
ON OUR REPORTS AND AND WE WILL
CATCH UP.
>> BUT BUT RIGHT NOW WE DON'T
HAVE THOSE THESE REPORTS GOING
OUT.
>> SO HOPEFULLY I HOPE I DIDN'T
ASK EVERYBODY TO BE A SPEED
READER.
BUT IF IF YOU'VE HAD AN
OPPORTUNITY TO LOOK AT THE
FIRST DOCUMENT, THE ONE THAT'S
DATED OCTOBER 18TH, IT'S JUST A
DRAFT.
>> ARE THERE ANY COMMENTS,
ADDITIONS, CORRECTIONS,
ANYTHING COUNCIL COUNSEL,
COMMISSIONER MILGROM THANK YOU
CHAIR CARTER.
I HAVE THREE QUESTIONS I GUESS
ON THIS DOCUMENT.
I DON'T I DON'T HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS ON THE REST OF IT.
SO THIS TICKET IS SENT FAIRLY
SOON AFTER THE COMPLAINT IS
FILED AND SO IT SAYS, UH, THANK
YOU FOR FILING.
IT HAS RECEIVED YOUR COMPLAINT
AND YOUR RESPONSE HAS BEEN
RECORDED.
I'M NOT SURE I KNOW WHAT THAT
IS.
WHAT RESPONSE AND WOULD HAVE
BEEN RECORDED.
>> SO WHEN A COMPLAINT IS
SUBMITTED YEAH.
IT GETS RECORDED INTO A
SHAREPOINT PORTAL SO ONE IS
WANTED AND SUBMITTED IT IS
RECORDED IN THE PORTAL.
SO IT'S JUST INFORMING THEM
THAT WE HAVE COLLECTED THEIR
COMPLAINT AND BUT I GUESS I
GUESS WHAT CONFUSED ME IS THAT
IT SAYS RESPONSE TO COMPLAINTS
BEEN RECORDED NOT NOT NO
THERE'S BEEN NO RESPONSE.
RIGHT.
WE HAVEN'T RESPONDED HE OR SHE
HASN'T RESPONDED.
SO I I DON'T KNOW MAYBE WE NEED
TO CHANGE.
WE'VE RECEIVED YOUR COMPLAINT
AND IT HAS BEEN RECORDED IT'S
BEEN A RECORD.
YEAH I THINK SO.
I MEAN OTHERWISE I'M JUST NOT
CLEAR WHAT YOUR RESPONSE IS AND
IF IT'S JUST THE COMPLAINT I
SUPPOSE WE NEED TO CHANGE IT IN
THE NEXT PARAGRAPH YOU CAN PLAY
IT WILL BE REVIEWED BY THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND
COMMISSION THE SECOND SENTENCE
IF YOUR COMPLAINT IS ABOUT
POLICE MISCONDUCT, THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT WILL REVIEW THE
COMPLAINT FIRST POSSIBLE
OFFICER DISCIPLINE PRIOR SO
WHETHER WHETHER THE COMPLAINT
IS ABOUT POLICE MISCONDUCT YOU
KNOW THE WAY I UNDERSTAND THE
FLOW CHART IT WILL BE REVIEWED
BY THE POLICE DEPARTMENT FIRST
REGARDLESS.
>> SO NOT NECESSARILY SOLELY
BECAUSE I READ THE ORDINANCE
AGAIN AND I THINK BASICALLY
WHAT IT SAYS IS THAT IF IT'S
ABOUT POLICE MISCONDUCT THEN IT
GOES FIRST TO THE POLICE.
BUT IT MIGHT BE A COMPLAINT
ABOUT JUST THE WAY THE CITY IS
DOING THINGS RIGHT.
>> BUT I THOUGHT WELL I
UNDERSTOOD THIS FLOWCHART.
WE RECEIVED THE COMPLAINT.
WE SEND IT TO THE DEPARTMENT
FIRST AND AND THEY HAVE UP TO
THIRTY DAYS.
RIGHT.
IN BEST CASE BEFORE WE CAN DO
ANYTHING WITH THE COMPLAINT.
RIGHT.
CORRECT.
SO I THINK IT'S TRUE TO SAY
YOUR COMPLAINT REGARDING YOUR
COMPLAINT WILL BE SENT TO THE
POLICE FIRST AND NOT JUST ONLY
IF THERE'S MISCONDUCT.
>> I KNOW YOU'RE RIGHT WITH
WITH WHAT YOU'RE LOOKING AT BUT
I WAS INCORRECT WITH THE WAY
THE CHARITY IS.
OKAY.
AND I'LL TAKE IT BACK AND WE'D
REDO IT SO THAT IT DOES
CORRESPOND EXACTLY WITH WHAT
THE ORDINANCE SAYS BECAUSE A
COMPLAINT COULD COME IN TO XPAC
AND OFF THE TOP OF MY HEAD I
CAN'T THINK RIGHT NOW ABOUT
WHAT THAT COMPLAINT WOULD BE
BUT WE COULD GET A COMPLAINT
THAT'S NOT NECESSARILY ABOUT
POLICE MISCONDUCT.
MAYBE IT'S ABOUT THE WAY THAT
THE CITY HANDLES POLICING AT
THE FOOTBALL GAMES.
>> HMM.
SO THERE'S NO CLAIM OF ANY
MISCONDUCT BUT THEY JUST DON'T
LIKE THE WAY THINGS ARE DONE
AND THAT KIND OF COMPLAINT DOES
NOT HAVE TO GO FIRST TO THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
WE CAN LOOK AT IT AND MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS SO I'LL TWEAK
THE CHARGE.
>> THAT'S A GOOD CATCH.
THANK YOU.
WELL, MY AND MY LAST COMMENT.
YEAH.
YOU DON'T MIND THE LAST
SENTENCE IN THAT PARAGRAPH.
WELL, THE COMMISSION COULD I
GUARANTEE YOU WOULD REVIEW
OF YOUR COMPLAINT WILL BE
FINISHED.
THE COMMISSION WILL GIVE YOU AN
UPDATE WITHIN 21 DAYS.
NO, UM IT'S LIKELY THAT THAT
UPDATE WILL BE WE DON'T HAVE AN
UPDATE SO WE MIGHT JUST WANT TO
SAY THIRTY BECAUSE WE KNOW THAT
THE POLICE ARE LIKELY TO HAVE
IT FOR FOR ABOUT THIRTY DAYS
AND THEY JUST CHANGE THAT TILL
THE THIRTY DAYS.
SO YES, YOU'RE RIGHT.
THIS NEEDS TO BE WITHIN MAYBE
WE COULD SAY WITHIN
APPROXIMATELY BECAUSE WE DON'T
KNOW THAT WE'RE GOING TO GET
BACK FROM THE POLICE IN THIRTY
DAYS.
IS THAT OK WITH EVERYBODY.
>> IT'S OK WITH ME ALL RIGHT.
>> ANY OTHER COMMENTS OR
SUGGESTIONS I MIGHT HAVE ONE
GRAMMATICAL ONE AND THAT IS THE
LAST PARAGRAPH IN THE SECOND
SENTENCE IN THE SAME SHEET.
>> YES OK THE WORD BE I THINK
CAN BE TAKEN OUT THE LAST
PARAGRAPH LAST PARAGRAPH, THE
SECOND SENTENCE CITY STAFF
LIAISON IS ALSO BE HAPPY IT
DIDN'T SOUND RIGHT WHEN YOU
SAID SO WAS ALSO HAPPY THER
WILL ALSO BE HAPPY OR WILL WILL
ALSO EITHER WILL ALSO BE HAPPY
OR IS ALSO HAPPY TO ONE OF THE
RIGHT BUT WHICH EITHER WAY YOU
WANT IT WE WON'T MAKE QUITE A
BIT OF WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO
MAKE.
OH I WILL ALSO KNOW IT WELL
ALSO OR JUST TAKE THE B OUT
THAT'S OK.
YEAH YOU WANT TO TAKE THE B OUT
AND SAY WE DON'T KNOW THAT
HAPPY BECAUSE IT'S A WILSON ARE
YOU GOING TO BE HAPPY?
>> WE'LL BE YOU'LL BE HAPPY
WE'LL BE HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS ASK PERMISSION.
YES YES OK.
>> ANYTHING ELSE ANYTHING ELSE
ON ANY OF THESE DOCUMENTS.
>> THE THIRD ONE OF COURSE IS
AS I SAY IS THE REPORT WE AS A
COMMISSION ARE NOT GOING TO GET
EVERYTHING AS I SAID BEFORE BUT
WE WILL GET A REPORT LIKE THIS
.
>> SO YOU SHOULD BE ABLE IN
READING THE REPORT TO KNOW OK,
THIS WAS A COMPLAINT ABOUT X,
Y, Z.
THIS IS WHAT WE THINK.
THIS IS THE REVIEW THAT WE DID
AND THIS IS HOW WE THINK IT
SHOULD BE BE HANDLED.
WE'RE ALSO WE'RE SUPPOSED TO BE
MAKING RECOMMENDATIONS AND JUST
AS AN EXAMPLE, I DON'T WANT
BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW THE
DETAILS BUT I KNOW THAT ONE
CASE THAT COMMISSIONER OTHMAN
WAS WORKING ON THERE WAS A
COMPLAINT AND THE OFFICER FOR
SOME REASON DIDN'T HAVE HIS
BODY CAMERA AND IT WAS A TIME
WHEN HE DIDN'T NECESSARILY HAVE
TO HAVE DONE IT WITHOUT DOING
SOMETHING IN THE COMMUNITY.
BUT THE RECOMMENDATION WAS ANY
TIME THE POLICE OFFICER WAS OUT
IN THE COMMUNITY THEY OUGHT TO
HAVE THE BODY CAM ANY TIME THEY
MAKE CONTACT WITH THE CITIZEN.
>> SO THAT'S A RECOMMENDED WHEN
IT COMES BEFORE US.
>> THEN WE'LL MAKE A FORMAL
RECOMMENDATION BASED ON THE
INFORMATION MANAGER'S REPORT
AND WE MAKE THAT TO THE POLICE
AND SO FORTH AND SO ON WHICH
AND IT MAY REQUIRE MONEY I
DON'T KNOW IF THEY DON'T HAVE
ENOUGH BODY CAMERAS FOR EVERY
TIME SOMEBODY GOES OUT TO HAVE
TO GAME ON.
BUT WILL THOSE ARE THE KINDS
OF RECOMMENDATIONS THAT YOU CAN
MAKE WHEN WE GET THEM BACK.
>> ANYTHING ELSE ABOUT ANY
OF THESE DOCUMENTS?
WHAT I'M GOING TO DO IS GET
THESE OUT TO YOU IN THE NEXT
WEEK OR SO SO YOU CAN FINISH
LOOKING AT THEM AND PICK OUT
THEM AND MAKE ANY CHANGES YOU
WANT TO AND THAT THE NEXT
MEETING IN NOVEMBER WILL
FORMALLY ADOPT THE DOCUMENTS.
SO THERE'S ONE THAT GOES OUT AS
SOON AS THE COMPLAINT COMES IN,
ONE THAT LETS THE COMPLAINANT
KNOW WE'VE REVIEWED THE
COMPLAINT AND ALSO THE REPORT
THAT THE INFORMATION MANAGERS
WILL MAKE BACK TO US AND I'LL
FIX MY CHART THAT WILL HAVE A
BETTER CHANCE.
>> OK, ANYTHING ELSE ABOUT THIS
COMPLAINT PROCESS?
>> AND AGAIN, WE'LL HAVE A MUCH
MORE THOROUGH DESCRIPTION
OF THE PROCESS WHEN MR. I'M
SORRY WHEN COMMISSIONER OFMAN
IS BACK WITH US NEXT.
YEAH I HAVE ONE AND I'M LOOKING
AT THE SEPTEMBER EIGHT.
>> OK, LET ME TURN THE PAGE
OVER FIRST BEFORE IT'S NOT SO
ON THIS PAGE IT SAYS THE
LESSONS CAN BE CAN ALSO BE
CONTACTED BY PHONE OR MAIL TO
TRY AND ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS.
SO I SEE THE MAIL I DON'T SEE A
PHONE NUMBER.
>> OK, SO WE NEED TO ADD OUR WE
NEED TO ADD OUR PHONE NUMBER TO
THIS AND OUR ALL OUR EMAIL
ADDRESS RIGHT.
THE EMAIL IS THERE.
OH NO IT'S NOT
.
>> SO IS THE MAIL REFERRING TO
THE SNAIL MAIL OR EMAIL?
>> WE HAVE A WE HAVE MAIL HERE
SO THEY CAN FORMALLY MAIL
SOMETHING IN TO THE COMMISSION.
>> OK, AND WHAT I'LL DO IS I'LL
YOU KNOW, THE COMMISSION WITH
THESE DRAFTS AND THEN I'LL ASK
FOR FEEDBACK AND COMMENTS ON
THE DRAFT SO WE CAN GATHER AND
MAKE THE CHANGES THAT RELATE TO
OK, I'M GOING TO GIVE YOU WHAT
WE DID TO WE DID TODAY SO YOU
CAN MAKE THOSE OK, VERY GOOD.
THANK YOU ALL SO MUCH FOR
LOOKING AT THOSE DOCUMENTS AND
WE'LL TRY TO GET THEM APPROVED
AT THE NOVEMBER MEETING
.
>> YOU ALSO HAVE IN YOUR PACKET
THERE'S A RESOLUTION TO CITY
COUNCIL REGARDING ARNAB TRAFFIC
TRANSPARENT NOW THIS IS A
RESORT.
THERE'S ALSO YOU HAVE THE OTHER
RESOLUTION
.
THERE ARE TWO RESOLUTIONS THAT
COUNCIL APPROVED.
ONE WAS FROM US AND ONE WAS
FROM THE TRAFFIC COMMISSION
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION LAST
YEAR.
HMM.
>> THIS IS FROM LAST YEAR.
YES.
THESE ARE THESE HAVE ALREADY
BEEN APPROVED BY COUNCIL
ALREADY BEEN PASSED AND THE
REASON THAT I WANTED YOU ALL TO
HAVE THESE AS YOU KNOW YOU KNOW
,WE HAD OUR OUR PUBLIC FORUM
REGARDING THE TRAFFIC STUDY AS
WELL AS THE TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
LAST MONTH AND THESE
RESOLUTIONS HAVE ALREADY BEEN
APPROVED BY COUNCIL BASICALLY
ASKING THE POLICE DEPARTMENT TO
PROVIDE INFORMATION TO PARK ON
A REGULAR BASIS AND WHAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT IS THE POSSIBILITY
OF ASKING THE SAME GROUP THAT
DID THE TRAFFIC STUDY AFTER WE
COLLECT DATA AGAIN AND IT'S
PROBABLY GOING TO TAKE US A
COUPLE OF YEARS TO GET THE ALL
OF THE DATA THAT WE NEED AND WE
CAN SEE IF THE NEW ORDINANCE
HAS MADE A DIFFERENCE WITH
REGARD TO OUR TRAFFIC STOPS.
WE'LL BE ABLE TO COMPARE SO
HOPEFULLY BACK TO KARPIAK WILL
WE'LL AGREE BUT WE HAVE TO HAVE
THE DATA.
SO I GOT A CALL FROM THE CHAIR
OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
LAST WEEK AND SHE SUGGESTED AND
I THINK IT'S A REAL GOOD IDEA
THAT WE PUT TOGETHER A JOINT
COMMITTEE.
HOPEFULLY WE WON'T BE MEETING
FOR EVER A COUPLE OF MEETINGS
TO GET THINGS GOING AND TO SEE
EXACTLY YOU KNOW, HOW WE'RE
GOING TO APPROACH THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND WITH REGARD TO
THE INFORMATION THAT'S
REQUESTED IN THESE OR IN THESE
RESOLUTIONS.
SO I BELIEVE THERE ARE TWO OR
THREE PEOPLE FROM THE HUMAN
RIGHTS COMMISSION THAT WANT TO
BE ON THIS JOINT COMMITTEE.
I DON'T KNOW WHEN WE'RE GOING
TO MEET.
WE'RE JUST PUTTING IT TOGETHER
.
AND SO I HAVE INDICATED THAT I
WOULD LIKE TO BE ON IT AND THAT
I WOULD ASK AT OUR MEETING IF
THERE'S ANYONE ELSE WHO WOULD
LIKE TO JOIN THIS JOINT
COMMITTEE AND I HAVEN'T
CONTACTED THE TRANSPORT
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION YET
BUT SINCE THEY ALSO HAD A
RESOLUTION I SUSPECT THEY MIGHT
WANT TO JOIN THAT TYPE OF JOINT
COMMITTEE.
SO ANYBODY INTERESTED AT ALL IN
PUTTING THIS TOGETHER?
WELL, I TELL YOU WHAT, SURE.
GOOD COMMISSIONER.
>> WHY THANK THANK YOU FOR
CONTINUING TO GET ME TO
PRONOUNCE IT TILLIKUM THANK
YOU.
>> ANYBODY ELSE IF YOU'D
COMMISSION WANTED TO DO NOW?
WELL, WE'RE GOING TO LOOK AT
THESE ORDINANCES.
WE'RE GOING TO FIGURE OUT WE'RE
GOING TO CONTACT THE POLICE.
WE'RE GOING TO FIGURE IS
BETWEEN THE TWO ORDINANCES WHAT
EXACTLY IS THE INFORMATION THAT
WE WANT THAT WE'RE GOING TO GET
HOW THEY'RE GOING TO GET IT TO
US, WHAT FORM THEY'RE GOING TO
GET TO US, WHO IS GOING TO HOLD
ON TO IT?
THIS KIND OF THING.
SO IT'S A MATTER OF REALLY JUST
SORT OF GETTING IT GETTING IT
TOGETHER.
>> SO COMMISSIONER ALIKHAN AND
I AND IF ANYBODY OVER THE NEXT
COUPLE OF WEEKS THINKS THAT
THAT'S SOMETHING YOU MIGHT WANT
TO BE INVOLVED IN, PLEASE LET
ME KNOW.
>> OK, MOVING ON VERY QUICKLY,
SOME OF US WILL BE GOING BEFORE
OUR NEXT MEETING TO NACOLE TO
CHICAGO IF ANY OF YOU ARE GOING
I GOT AN EMAIL FROM THE CHAIR
OF THE EAST LANSING OVERSIGHT
COMMISSION AND SHE'D LIKE TO
MEET WITH US WHILE WE'RE THERE
MAYBE FOR LUNCH OR SOMETHING.
>> AND SO I DON'T KNOW IF YOU
ALL HAVE GONE ONLINE YET TO
LOOK AT THE SCHEDULE FOR NACOLE
BUT THERE'LL BE A COUPLE
OF LUNCHES.
YOU KNOW WHAT?
NOT THAT THERE'S LESS LUNCH ON
YOUR OWN AND SO MAYBE THAT
WOULD BE A GOOD TIME TO GET
WITH THAT GROUP.
SO IF YOU'RE GOING LET ME KNOW
SEND ME AN EMAIL AND LET ME
KNOW.
>> I'M THINKING THERE'S A FREE
LUNCH I THINK ON MONDAY AND THE
MONDAY BUT THAT MIGHT BE A GOOD
TIME.
IT'S A COUPLE OF DINNERS OPEN
BUT THEY'D LIKE I THINK IT
WOULD BE GOOD FOR US TO GET
TOGETHER AND CHAT WITH THOSE
FOLKS FROM EAST LANSING IN THE
DAY TO DAY.
I'M SORRY.
WHAT ARE THE DATES ON THAT THE
2ND OF NOVEMBER THROUGH NO
THAT'S ANOTHER THAT'S NO IT'S
THE 12TH THROUGH SIX TO SIXTEEN
AND FIFTEEN REGISTRATION
REGISTRATION IS CLOSED.
>> YES IT IS YEAH.
YEAH.
SO OK SORRY NEXT YEAR WE ARE
YOU WE GET ABOUT IT WE NEED TO
IT'S A GOOD EDUCATIONAL
EXPERIENCE OK NOW I'M ALMOST
DONE OUR NEXT MEETING WE HAVE
NO MEETING IN IN DECEMBER AND I
WAS JUST WONDERING IF IT SOUNDS
LIKE A GOOD IDEA FOR US TO HAVE
SOME KIND OF A HOLIDAY GET
TOGETHER IN DECEMBER AGAIN TO
GET TO KNOW EACH OTHER A LITTLE
BETTER AND JUST TO YES.
BE FINE.
YES OK OK GOOD.
WELL I WILL NEXT MONTH SOMETIME
ASK MISS CUMMINS THE KIND
OF CONTACT US AND SEE DAYS
TIMES AND THAT KIND OF THING
WHEN WE MIGHT WANT TO DO THAT.
>> OK GOOD GOOD.
ALL RIGHT THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THAT IS ALL THAT I HAVE NEXT
ON THE AGENDA
.
IS THERE ANY OLD BUSINESS THAT
WE NEED TO TALK ABOUT?
WE HAVE NOTHING ON THE AGENDA
UNDER OLD BUSINESS, ANY NEW
BUSINESS
.
>> DO ANY OF THE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEES HAVE A REPORT?
>> I HAVE I HAVE A BRIEF ON
COMMISSIONER MILGROM.
YES.
FOR THE POLICY COMMITTEE BRIEF
UPDATE CHAIR CARTER AND I HAD
REVIEWED SOME PERSONNEL
REGULATIONS SEVERAL MONTHS AGO
,SOME FOURTEEN OR NINETEEN
PAGES WORTH FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE THAT I DON'T KNOW THAT
WE NEED TO GO TO AT THE MOMENT.
BUT AND THEN THE QUESTION CAME
UP THERE WAS A SUMMER HIATUS
BUT THE QUESTION ALSO CAME UP
WELL WHERE ARE THE OTHERS?
ARE THERE OTHERS SOME
CONTROVERSY OVER HOW MANY THERE
WERE.
BUT AS IT HAPPENS I'M HAPPY TO
REPORT THAT THE INTERIM CHIEF
MAGUIRE OH, I NEEDED TO DO WAS
ASK HIM DIRECTLY AND THE VERY
NEXT DAY I GOT IN IN MY IN MY
INBOX THE COMPANIONED THE
COMPANION TO THE PERSONNEL IS
JUST LIKE ONE PIECE OF A VERY
LARGE NUMBER.
SO THE GOOD NEWS IS THAT WE'VE
RECEIVED WHAT HAS BEEN
REPRESENTED TO US AS ALL OF THE
CURRENT POLICIES, SOME OF WHICH
ARE ACTUALLY GOING THROUGH A
REVIEW THROUGH THEIR SORT
OF WAS REGULATORY BODY THAT
THAT HAS BEEN VETTING THEIRS
BUT THAT THAT HAS ALMOST BEEN
COMPLETED.
SO EACH OF THESE POLICIES HAS
THE DATA ON WHICH THEY WERE
LAST REVIEWED AND APPROVED BY
THIS BY THIS OVERSIGHT BODY,
NOT OURS.
ANOTHER SORT OF A NATIONAL
CERTIFICATION AMONG THE AMONG
THE POLICE DEPARTMENTS.
SO THE GOOD NEWS IS WE HAVE
THEM ALL.
THE BAD NEWS IS THERE ARE MANY,
MANY, MANY TO REVIEW.
BUT THE BEST NEWS IS THAT I
UNDERSTAND COMMISSIONER GREEN
HAS AGREED TO JOIN THE
COMMITTEE.
IT'S BEEN A IT'S BEEN A
COMMITTEE OF ONE FOR A LONG
TIME NOW.
SURE.
CARTER HAS ASKED TO TO GET
INVOLVED BUT SHE DOES SO MANY
THINGS I THOUGHT WELL LET ME
GET STARTED.
SO I HAVE AND SO WITH YOUR
PERMISSION, I'LL I'LL EMAIL YOU
SOON AND I'LL SEND YOU WHAT
THERE IS THERE AND WE CAN SPLIT
IT UP.
I'M HAPPY TO TAKE, YOU KNOW,
THE LION'S SHARE AND SINCE I'VE
ALREADY GOTTEN STARTED BUT AND
IF WE NEED EACH YEAR KURTAS
HELP AND IF ANYBODY ELSE WANTS
TO GET INVOLVED THAT WOULD BE
GREAT.
IT'S REALLY JUST A MATTER
OF THE ONES I'VE REVIEWED SO
FAR ARE PRETTY STRAIGHTFORWARD
AND WELL DONE.
SO IT'S A MATTER OF IF THEY'RE
YOU KNOW EVEN IF THEY'RE TYPOS
JUST HAS TO GO THROUGH IT GIVE
GIVE SOME INPUT ABOUT THEM
WHERE WHERE WHERE IT'S NEEDED
AND ALSO TO TAKE A LOOK AND SAY
WELL MAYBE IF YOU IF THERE'S IF
THERE'S THIS REGULATION MAYBE
THERE SHOULD BE THAT REGULATION
PROVIDE SOME SUGGESTIONS
POTENTIALLY AND UM THE INTERIM
CHIEF SEEMED VERY JUST VERY
OPEN TO THAT TO THAT WHOLE IDEA
.
SO UM SO I THINK SO THAT'S
ABOUT IT FOR NOW AND I HOPE TO
HAVE A LITTLE BIT MORE OF A
SUBSTANTIVE UPDATE NEXT MONTH
AFTER I HAVE GONE THROUGH AND
HOPEFULLY YOU'VE THE
COMMISSIONER GREEN HAS GONE
THROUGH MORE OF THEM AS WELL.
>> YEAH, GOOD.
AND WE REALLY APPRECIATE THE
WORK THAT IT TAKES TO GO
THROUGH THESE POLICIES AND IF
THIS IS THE KIND OF THING ONCE
WE GO THROUGH THEM ONCE THEN
SITUATIONS MAY PRESENT
THEMSELVES WELL WE SAY WELL YOU
KNOW, MAYBE THIS POLICY NEEDS
TO BE CHANGED.
MAYBE WE NEED TO LOOK AT THIS
POLICY SO ALWAYS YOU KNOW, IF
THAT COMES UP IN YOUR
CONVERSATIONS WITH CITIZENS OR
JUST WHATEVER SITUATION YOU
MIGHT ENCOUNTER WHERE YOU SAY
WELL I WONDER ABOUT THIS
POLICY.
I WONDER IF THERE'S A POLICY ON
THIS RIGHT.
AND THEN OUR
POLICY COMMITTEE
WILL BE ABLE TO TO HELP YOU
WITH THAT.
WELL, IF SOMETHING CAME UP
ABOUT THERE WAS A QUESTION I
THINK YOU CAME UP AT OUR IN OUR
LAST MEETING AND I IF IT WAS
ASKED WAS IT ASKED BY A MEMBER
OF THE PUBLIC OR NOT BUT JUST
THE IDEA OF OF THE WAY THAT
WHEN YOU STOPPED FOR ANY FOR A
TRAFFIC VIOLATION OF ANY KIND
JUST DOES THE OFFICER INTRODUCE
HIM OR HERSELF AND AND AND AND
GIVE MORE AND GIVE OTHER
IDENTITY AND ALSO I THINK YOU
KNOW, SAY WHY WHY YOU'RE BEING
STOPPED SO THAT IT CAN
DE-ESCALATE IT.
IN FACT I THINK I THINK COUNCIL
MEMBER HERE SOMEONE WAS TALKING
ABOUT THAT WHICH YOU CAN
ESCALATE SO AND AND I HADN'T
SEEN A POLICY LIKE THAT.
OF COURSE I HADN'T GONE THROUGH
MANY OF THE POLICIES AND I
TALKED TO INTERIM CHIEF METZKER
AND THEN INCOMING INTERIM CHIEF
MAGUIRE RIGHT AFTERWARDS AND
THEY BOTH SAID TO ME WE DO HAVE
THAT POLICY NOW I'VE BEEN
STOPPED BY AN ANN ARBOR POLICE
OFFICER AND I'M NOT SO SURE
THAT'S THE WAY THEY I'M NOT SO
SURE THAT'S THE WAY THEY
APPROACH ME.
I HAVE NOT SEEN THAT POLICY YET
BUT I'VE BEEN TOLD BY THEM THAT
THAT IS IN FACT A POLICY OF THE
DEPARTMENT AND IF AND IF AFTER
WE DO THE REVIEW THERE IS NO
SUCH POLICY, WE WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT THAT THAT IT IS THAT
IT WILL.
>> YEAH, YEAH.
AND I THINK I THINK I SAW A
POLICY THAT SAID SOMETHING
ABOUT WHAT AN OFFICER SHOULD I
THINK IT WAS AND I SHOULD
WHETHER THEN I SHALL OR MOST
YOU KNOW AND I THINK IF WE FIND
THAT POLICY AND WE CAN SEE BUT
YOU KNOW WE WERE IN MY HUSBAND
WERE IN HENDERSON, NEVADA THE
FIRST OF THE YEAR AND WE WERE
DRIVING A RELATIVE'S CARS
EVENING, YOU KNOW, DRIVING DOWN
A ROAD AND YOU SEE THE RED
LIGHTS BEHIND YOU.
>> OH MY GOODNESS.
WHAT'S GOING ON?
WHAT HAPPENED?
WE DIDN'T DO ANYTHING.
WE PULLED OVER.
THE OFFICER GETS OUT OF THE
CAR, COMES AROUND TO THE WINDOW
AND HE SAYS HELLO, MY NAME IS
OFFICER SO-AND-SO FROM THE
HENDERSON POLICE DEPARTMENT.
I STOPPED YOU BECAUSE YOU'RE
THE TAG IS EXPIRED ON YOUR
LICENSE PLATE AND THAT JUST IT
JUST MADE EVERYTHING BETTER,
YOU KNOW?
AND SO AND THEN I THINK WE WERE
DISCUSSING FOR OFFICER SAFETY I
HAVE A FRIEND IT TURNS OUT WHO
IS WITH THE POLICE OVERSIGHT IN
THE CITY IN FLORIDA.
>> THEY THINK THAT IT'S FOR THE
OFFICER SAFETY IF YOU APPROACH
A CAR AND YOU'VE THAT SOMEBODY
IN THERE WHO'S AN ESCAPEE OR
SOMETHING, YOU KNOW, AND THEY
WERE STOPPED BECAUSE THEY WERE
SPEEDING, THE OFFICER GOES UP
AND THIS PERSON IS
AUTOMATICALLY GOING TO BE WHY
IS HE STOPPING ME?
YOU KNOW, LET ME GET READY TO
SHOOT AND THE OFFICER STOPPED
YOU BECAUSE YOU WERE GOING FIVE
MILES OVER THE SPEED LIMIT.
>> IT DEESCALATES THE WHOLE
SITUATION ALL ROUND.
>> SO I THINK THAT IS ONE
OF THE POLICIES THAT WE REALLY
AND I'VE HAD SEVERAL CITIZENS
SAY TO ME WHY DOES THE OFFICER
TO TELL ME WHY IS THAT?
>> SO THAT'S KIND OF A THAT'S
KIND OF A POLICY WE REALLY WILL
BE LOOKING FOR THAT.
YEAH.
OK, GOOD THANK YOU.
UM THE TRAINING COMMITTEE I I
HAVE GOTTEN THE NAMES OF THE
OFFICERS WHO HANDLE TRAINING
AND I, I DON'T KNOW YOU KNOW
WE'LL GET TOGETHER AND DECIDE
HOW YOU WANT TO HANDLE IT IF
YOU WANT TO SIT IN ON SOME
OF THE TRAINING WHAT YOU
EXACTLY WHAT YOU WANT TO DO BUT
WE'RE LOOKING AT TRAINING HOW
OUR OFFICERS TRAINED IS THERE
IN EXISTENCE.
>> THIS IS ONE OF THE THINGS I
THINK THAT NACOLE HELPS US WITH
TO.
IS THERE TRAINING OUT THERE
THAT WE DON'T KNOW ABOUT THAT
WE'RE NOT USING PERHAPS THE
TRAINING ON DE-ESCALATION
TRAINING ON VARIOUS THINGS THAT
WE DON'T HAVE YET AND THEN
WE'RE ALSO LOOKING AT TRAINING
FOR US.
>> CAN WE WHAT DO WE NEED DO
YOU THINK TO BE TRAINED AS AS
OVERSIGHT PROFESSIONALS?
OK, SO WE'LL BE IF THERE'S
ANYTHING ELSE FROM THE
COMMITTEE THAT'S GOOD.
OTHERWISE WE'LL BE MEETING I
THINK THE MEETING IS COMING UP.
>> YES.
THE TRAINING TRAIN WE'VE
ALREADY GOT A MEETING SET.
GOOD.
YEAH.
>> IT'S THE FIRST MONTH OH THE
FIRST MONDAY.
>> THAT'S AS I WAS JUST GOING
ABOUT REMINDING US THAT YEAH.
YEAH.
AND THEN THE OUTREACH COMMITTEE
WILL JUST HAVE TO GET TOGETHER
AND SEE WHAT WE'RE GOING TO DO.
>> WHO'S OUTREACH YOU OUTREACH.
OKAY MR. YEAH GOOD THANK YOU.
DO THEY HAVE A MEETING SOON.
ALL THAT I GOT TO GET THAT SET
TONIGHT.
>> OKAY YEAH OK INFORMATION
MANAGERS ARE NOT HERE TODAY BUT
WE'LL BE AGAIN THEY'RE THEY'RE
PRESENTATION WILL BE NEXT IN
THE NO IN THE NOVEMBER MEETING.
>> OK DO WE HAVE AN UPDATE FROM
CITY COUNCIL TONIGHT.
UM THE PAST COUPLE OF CITY
COUNCIL MEETINGS HAVE BEEN
LARGELY FOCUSED ON APPROVING
CONTRACTS.
IT'S JUST INFRASTRUCTURE
CONTRACTS APPROVING A REVIEW,
DOING REVIEWS, PERFORMANCE
REVIEWS FOR CITY ATTORNEY FOR
OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR
APPROVING A RAISE FOR OUR CITY
ATTORNEY.
>> OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR HAS A
PAUSE ON HIS SALARY INCREASE
BECAUSE OF PART OF HE REQUESTED
THAT THAT ONLY BE CONSIDERED
AFTER TWO YEARS WITH THE CITY
AS THE CHALLENGED HIMSELF AND I
THOUGHT THAT WAS REALLY
ADMIRABLE FOR HIM TO COME INTO
THE CITY AND I MEAN WE REVIEWED
HIS WORK AND IT'S EXCELLENT.
WE'RE REALLY WE'RE REALLY
THANKFUL AND LUCKY TO HAVE
SOMEONE ADMINISTRATOR DONEES
CALIBER HERE.
SO I JUST DON'T I JUST WANT TO
CLARIFY THAT THERE IS NO SALARY
INCREASE FOR HIM NOT BECAUSE
OF PERFORMANCE IS BECAUSE HE HE
HE PUT A SELF-IMPOSED CHALLENGE
TO YOUR CHALLENGE TO YOUR
CHALLENGE FOR HIMSELF.
>> UM, WE'VE AS I SAID BEFORE,
WE'VE HAD A NUMBER OF WORK
SESSIONS ACTUALLY COUNCIL
MEMBER HARRISON HAD A REALLY
GOOD QUESTION LAST NIGHT
HOMELESSNESS AND HOUSING WORK
SESSION ON THE IMPACT OF HOW
WE'VE USED OUR MARIJUANA EXCISE
TAX REVENUE AND IN IN A SUPPORT
TEAM ACTUALLY NO, IT'S
DIFFERENT FROM THE SUPPORT TEAM
THAT WE HAVE.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF YOU TO DOVE
INTO THAT BUT OTHERWISE IT'S
THE CHIEF PROCESS THAT WE NEED
TO TO LOOK BACK TO.
>> BUT CYNTHIA, I DON'T KNOW IF
YOU WANT TO TALK ABOUT HOW
HOUSING COMMISSION HAS TALKED
ABOUT THE IMPACT OF THAT THAT
FUNDING THAT YOU HAD.
THIS IS THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
CYNTHIA HAD SPEARHEADED LAST
YEAR OR EARLIER THIS YEAR
EARLIER THIS YEAR.
>> YEAH.
I DON'T THEY HAVEN'T REALLY
TALKED TOO MUCH ABOUT THE
IMPACT JUST YET.
>> IT'S CALLED THE I'M DRAWING
A BLANK ON WHAT IT'S CALLED.
I JUST REFERRED TO IT YESTERDAY
AND THE PROGRAM ITSELF IT IS A
PROGRAM THAT HELPS TO PROVIDE
TRAUMA INFORMED CASE MANAGEMENT
TO FOLKS THAT HAVE BEEN
IMPACTED BY THE CRIMINAL LEGAL
SYSTEM AND ALSO THOSE THAT ARE
EITHER HAVE A VOUCHER OR ON
GETTING ONE SOON.
SO UM, BASICALLY PROVIDING
SUPPORT TO INDIVIDUALS THAT ARE
LIVING THROUGHOUT THE COMMUNITY
BUT OUTSIDE OF AN AVALON
HOUSING SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
STRUCTURE.
SO THEY TALKED THEY SPOKE
YESTERDAY ABOUT IT WHILE WE
KNOW THEY SPOKE A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THE NEED FOR UM YOU KNOW,
THAT TYPE OF CASE CASE
MANAGEMENT AND YOU KNOW, WE'LL
BE KEEPING AN EYE OUT ON THE
IMPACT OF THAT THE
APPROPRIATION THAT WE WE MADE
DURING THE BUDGET CYCLE WHICH
LIKE COUNCIL MEMBER SONG SAID
WAS MARIJUANA EXCISE TAX MONEY
THAT WAS YOU KNOW, IN TERMS
OF THE FOLKS THAT HAVE IT
IMPACTED BY THE CRIMINAL LEGAL
SYSTEM, I THOUGHT YOU KNOW, WE
THOUGHT IT WAS APPROPRIATE TO
USE THOSE FUNDS TO FOLKS THAT
HAVE BEEN IMPACTED BY THE WAR
ON DRUGS SO THAT IS ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT CAME UP LAST NIGHT.
WE ALSO TALKED ABOUT HOW ONE
OF THE BUDGET AMENDMENTS TO
COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON'S
PROGRAM WAS TO ACTUALLY
RESTRICT THAT TO RESIDENTS IN
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR AND MAYBE
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE CAN
ALL COME UP FOR DISCUSSION IN
THE NEXT BUDGET CYCLE BECAUSE I
THINK MANY OF US ARE PRETTY
CLEAR AND UNDERSTANDING THAT WE
CAN CARE FOR OUR NEIGHBORS AND
THEIR AND THAT SOME POLICIES
THAT WE'VE PUT IN PLACE HAVE
PUSHED FOLKS OUTSIDE OF THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR SO PERHAPS WE
CAN RECONSIDER WHETHER THAT'S A
RESTRICTION WE WANT IN THE NEXT
PHASE OF THE MARIJUANA SALES
TAX REVENUE IS RESTRICTING THAT
MONEY ONLY TO BE USED FOR ANN
ARBOR, ANN ARBOR RESIDENTS IT'S
CALLED RISING HOPE AND IS IT SO
THE ISSUE IS IS THAT IT'S NOT
RESTRICTED TO FOLKS THAT LIVE
WITHIN THE CITY OF A NEIGHBOR
AND THE REASON IS IS BECAUSE
OUR HOUSING COMMISSION WHEN
WHEN FOLKS GET A VOUCHER
FROM
OUR HOUSING COMMISSION THEY GET
A HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER.
MOST OF THEM CAN'T FIND
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR SO THEY ARE FORCED
TO USE THE VOUCHER OUTSIDE
OF THE CITY OF VANCOUVER BUT
THEY ARE ALLOWED TO USE
ANYWHERE WITHIN THE COUNTY AND
ALSO MONROE COUNTY SO THAT IS
WHY A LARGE PERCENTAGE OF OUR
TENANT BASED VOUCHERS END UP
GOING OUTSIDE OF THE CITY
OF ANN.
>> SO, UM, LAST TIME WE MET WE
HAD I HAD BROUGHT UP THE
POLICING IMPROVEMENT BILL
PACKAGES THAT SENATOR STEPHANIE
CHANG HAS BEEN UNSUCCESSFUL
UNSUCCESSFUL IN INTRODUCING
INTO COMMITTEE AND THAT
INCLUDED UH I MEAN IT INCLUDES
WORK ON NO KNOCK WARRANTS, DUTY
TO INTERVENE USE OF FORCE AND
IT'S KIND OF UNFORTUNATE EVEN
THOUGH DEMOCRATS HAVE THE
MAJORITY THAT THESE THIS
PACKAGE HASN'T BEEN MOVED SAFE
DRIVE WHICH IS I THINK I SENT
IT TO KENNEDY AND I DON'T KNOW
IF YOU DO I SENT IT AND I SAID
OK, WHICH IS LEGISLATION THAT'S
IN COMMITTEE FOR DRIVER'S
LICENSES TO BE AVAILABLE TO
UNDOCUMENTED FOLKS.
THIS WAS FROM 1994 I THINK
UNTIL 2007 WAS AVAILABLE TO
DACA FOLKS UNDOCUMENTED FOLKS
TO BE ABLE TO HAVE A MICHIGAN
STATE DRIVER'S LICENSE WHICH
THE IDEA IS THAT IT BE SAFER
FOR EVERYONE, SAFER YOU KNOW,
FOR EVERYONE TO HAVE ACCESS
ACCESS TO BETTER TRAINING
INSURANCE.
BUT A REPUBLICAN ATTORNEY
GENERAL MICHAEL COX OVERTURNED
THAT IN 2007.
SO BETWEEN 2007 AND NOW IT'S
BEEN REALLY DIFFICULT FOR
GROUPS LIKE FOLKS WHO ARE
WORKING ON OUR FARMS IN THE
HOTEL INDUSTRY.
UH, TO ACCESS DRIVER'S LICENSE.
SO EVEN THOUGH WE'RE HERE IN
WASHINGTON COUNTY, WE HAVE
RECOUNTED PROGRAM STATEWIDE
THIS IS THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
FOLKS HAVE BEEN REALLY TRYING
TO PUSH FOR AND THE MICHIGAN
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION JUST
TODAY PUT OUT A STATEMENT AGAIN
TRYING TO ENCOURAGE OUR
LEGISLATURE IN THE SENATE IN
THE HOUSE TO PUSH US FORWARD TO
ACTUALLY GET A HEARING ON IT.
IT'S JUST BEEN SITTING IN
COMMITTEE.
>> SO IF YOU'RE INTERESTED WE
ONLY HAVE A COUPLE OF WEEKS
LEFT BEFORE WE LOSE OUR
MAJORITY.
>> WE HAVE SOME HOUSE DEMOCRATS
WHO ARE RUNNING FOR MAYORS FOR
THEIR AND THEIR CITIES.
YOU JUST GET PAID FOR AS MAYOR
SO IT'S JUST UNFORTUNATE THAT
SAYS AN ADVANCE AND I THINK
IT'S AN ISSUE THAT WOULD BE
CLOSE TO THIS COMMISSION
BECAUSE IT ALSO PUTS FOLKS
VULNERABLE TO TO POLICING IF
YOU DON'T HAVE A DRIVER'S
LICENSE.
SO IF IT'S OF INTEREST, I
ENCOURAGE FOLKS TO REACH OUT TO
YOUR STATE REPS AND PERSONALLY
IN WASHINGTON COUNTY OUR SEAT
RATES HAVE BEEN VERY GOOD ABOUT
TRYING TO PUSH THIS FORWARD.
BUT THEY STILL LIKE TO HEAR
FROM CONSTITUENTS AND YOU KNOW,
A BODY LIKE OURS TO SAY THAT
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE'D
LIKE TO SEE ADVANCED TO
ACTUALLY A HEARING AND
EVENTUALLY A VOTE.
IT SHOULD BE BIPARTISAN AND
OKAY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
YOU KNOW, WITH REGARD TO THE
COST OF HOUSING IN THIS CITY AT
COUNCIL MEETING I GUESS THE
FIRST OF THE MONTH THERE WAS A
WOMAN FROM A LAND BANK AND I
I'M I WILL TRY TO KEEP YOU ALL
INFORMED AND I FIGURE FIGURE
OUT SOMEBODY OUT THERE THAT WE
MIGHT BE INTERESTED IN HELPING
TO SUPPORT THE IDEA AND I HAD
NEVER HEARD I'M NOT SURE WHAT A
LAND BANK IS BUT I GAVE HER MY
CARD.
OH, AND BY THE WAY, NEW
COMMISSIONERS YOU NEED TO GET
CARDS MADE SO SO PEOPLE YOU CAN
HAND THEM OUT TO PEOPLE WE HAVE
BUSINESS CARDS SO MAKE SURE YOU
GET WITH IS THAT IS OK MAKE
SURE YOU GET WITH MOST
COMPANIES AND MAKE SURE THAT
SHE ORDERS YOUR YOUR BUSINESS
CARDS SO YOU'LL HAVE THOSE BUT
I GAVE HER I GAVE HER MY CARD
AND ASK HER TO KEEP US INFORMED
OUR POLICE DON'T LIVE IN THE
CITY RIGHT.
>> THIS IS BOTHERSOME TO ME ON
A LOT OF DIFFERENT LEVELS BUT
HOPEFULLY WE CAN WORK WITH
FOLKS WHO ARE INTERESTED IN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THE CITY.
>> YEAH, I CAN GIVE YOU A QUICK
UPDATE ON THAT.
I OWN THE HOUSING HUMAN
SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD
COMMISSION AND THAT'S THE CITY
COUNTY BODY AND WE WORK ON
EVERYTHING FROM MAKING SURE
THAT HUD GRANTS ARE ARE PUT OUT
AND THEN ACCEPTED APPROVED HAS
PUBLIC HEARINGS ON IT.
WE ALSO TALK A LOT ABOUT
REZONING.
>> SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
COUNCIL HAS BEEN WORKING ON FOR
QUITE SOME TIME IS REZONING
ALONG OUR TRANSPORTATION
CORRIDORS.
>> SO WE'VE ALREADY REZONE SOME
AREAS SO THAT WE COULD
ENCOURAGE MORE DENSE
DEVELOPMENT WHERE THERE'S
ACCESS TO BUSSES SPECIFICALLY.
SO WE'VE ALREADY ZONED A COUPLE
OF AREAS STATE AND EISENHOWER
BY THE MALL, JACKSON AREA AND
BASICALLY WE'RE JUST SAYING
THAT WE WOULD LIKE FUTURE
PROJECTS SO THAT CURRENT LIKE
NOT CURRENT BUILDINGS AND
BUILDINGS ARE WHAT THEY ARE
NOW.
BUT SHOULD OWNERS OF THESE
PARCELS CONSIDER CHANGING THEM?
WE NEED TO ENCOURAGE THEM TO
BUILD HIGHER TO INCLUDE
HOUSING.
SO IT'S JUST NOT JUST ONE USE
PERHAPS YOU KNOW WE'VE GOT
OFFICERS, NURSES, TEACHERS WHO
WOULD LOVE TO I MEAN IF THEY
WANT TO LIVE ABOVE A BANK OR A
TACO BELL OF A BANK OR TACO
BELL AND IT'S ACCESSIBLE BY BUS
.
THE NEXT STEP FOR REZONING IT'S
THE PLYMOUTH ROAD CORRIDOR IN
THE WASHINGTON ROAD CORRIDOR.
WE DO TALK ABOUT THIS BEING
REALLY TRYING TO STAY AHEAD
OF WHAT THE UNIVERSITY IS
DOING.
SO THE UNIVERSITY ACTUALLY ALSO
APPROACHED THE CITY AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND SAID HERE'S OUR
AMBITION AND YOUR PLANS FOR THE
NEXT TEN YEARS AND UP TO 2050
AND INCLUDES IDEAS SUCH AS A
MONORAIL CONNECTING ALL THE
CAMPUSES GOING THROUGH CENTRAL
CAMPUS, THE HOSPITAL AND THEN
UP TO NORTH CAMPUS.
I THINK IT'S EIGHT HUNDRED
MILLION DOLLAR PROJECT BY 2050
BUT ALSO INCLUDES WORK,
POTENTIAL WORKFORCE AND FAMILY
HOUSING ALONG THE PLIMOTH ROAD
CORRIDOR ON ALL THEIR PARCELS
NEXT TO THE RESEARCH CENTER AS
WELL AS A HOTEL CONFERENCE
CENTER ACROSS FROM WHERE LIKE
CYBERCAFE IS UP ON PLYMOUTH
ROAD.
>> SO SOME INTERESTING IDEAS.
WE JUST WANT TO BE ABLE TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE FOLKS WHO WORK
FOR THE UNIVERSITY HAVE A PLACE
TO WORK SO THEY'RE NOT FORCED
TO COMMUTE TO AND FROM
SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES.
WE WANT A PLACE THAT IT'S MORE
AFFORDABLE ALONG THESE
CORRIDORS.
WE HAVE A LOT OF NURSES, A LOT
OF NURSES WHO HAVE TO PARK RIDE
PRETTY FAR OUT TO COME INTO
WORK AND THEN NOW THAT THE
HOSPITAL IS BUILDING UP, THE
HOUSE IS BUILDING A THIRD
TOWER.
I THINK THEY'RE LOOKING AT 8000
NURSES WORKING ON THE AND
MEDICAL CAMPUS.
THAT'S A PRETTY I WOULD I WOULD
LOVE TO WELCOME A FRACTION
OF THEM TO ANN ARBOR TAXES.
ANN ARBOR JUST COMING CLOSER TO
THE CITY, GET MORE CARS OFF THE
ROAD.
WE HAVE EIGHTY THOUSAND DAILY.
ACTUALLY NO.
LAST NIGHT IT WAS UPDATED TO
NINETY THOUSAND DAILY COMMUTERS
.
WE'RE A CITY OF ONE HUNDRED
ALMOST TWENTY THOUSAND SO
THAT'S BASICALLY LIKE HAVING A
FOOTBALL GAME EVERY SINGLE
EVERY MORNING AND EVERY
AFTERNOON RIGHT.
>> SO WE NEED TO BE ABLE TO
TAKE A PORTION OF THE FOLKS OFF
THE ROADS SO THAT YOU KNOW, IF
THEY LIVE CLOSER THEY
CONTRIBUTE TO OUR OUR TAX ROLLS
TO OUR CITY SERVICES INSTEAD
OF CONTRIBUTING TO THE
TOWNSHIPS.
SO WE'RE TRYING FOR IT.
THEY'LL PROBABLY I MEAN YOU
WON'T SEE BUILDINGS PROBABLY
TILL ANOTHER FIVE OR TEN YEARS
JUST LIKE OUR PUBLIC PARCELS
WHERE WE HAVE ELEVEN PUBLIC
PARCELS WHERE WE CAN ACTUALLY
AFFORD TO LIVE, WHERE WE CAN
MAINTAIN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
UNITS VERSUS ON THE PRIVATE
MARKET.
IT'S HARD TO REALLY INCENTIVIZE
FOLKS TO DEVELOP AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS BUT EVEN THEN
LIKE THE EAST KATHERINE PROJECT
WHICH IS REALLY, REALLY
INTERESTING THAT'S A FIVE STORY
BUILDING WITH AND RECOGNIZING
BLACK HISTORY BLACK INFLUENCE
IN THE KOREATOWN AREA.
JENNIFER HALL, OUR HOUSING
COMMISSIONER HAS HAD TO COBBLE
TOGETHER TWELVE SOURCES
OF FUNDING FOR THAT.
IT'S REALLY DIFFICULT.
SO RIGHT NOW WE'RE AT LIKE
400000 A UNIT.
THE COSTS ARE HIGHLY WAS HIGH
SUPPLY COSTS ARE REALLY HIGH SO
YOU PROBABLY WON'T SEE ANYTHING
FOR MAYBE ANOTHER THREE YEARS
NOW I SAW THE STATISTIC I
COULDN'T BELIEVE THAT THE
AVERAGE HOUSE IN ANN ARBOR IS
OVER SIX HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS AVERAGE.
>> YEAH I MEAN IT'S CRAZY I
THINK IS ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY
K FOR A FOUR PERSON HOUSEHOLD.
>> YEAH YEAH.
SO YEAH SO WE DO HAVE AN
INTEREST IN TRYING TO GET
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TO KEEP SOME
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
ALSO WITH REGARD TO TRYING TO
GET OUT TO TO RECRUIT FROM
WITHIN THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR I
HAVE MET WITH ONE OF THE PUBLIC
SCHOOL BOARD MEMBERS.
>> YOU KNOW THEY PUT THEY PUT
THE THEY DON'T WANT THAT THEY
DIDN'T WANT POLICE AT ALL IN
THE SCHOOLS NOW I CAN
UNDERSTAND THE RESOURCE
OFFICERS YOU KNOW, THEY DON'T
WANT THE RESOURCE OFFICERS IN
THE SCHOOLS BUT IT'S MY
UNDERSTANDING THAT LIKE EVEN
WHEN YOU HATE WHEN THEY HAVE
CAREER DAY, THEY DON'T WANT
POLICE TO COME HOME.
>> WHAT I THINK THAT THEY'RE
THERE'S AN INTEREST, YOU KNOW,
WITH SOME OF OUR STUDENTS WHO
WANT TO BE POLICE OFFICERS AND
THE THE AS I UNDERSTAND IT, THE
DEPARTMENT HAS FUNDS TO SEND
CADETS THROUGH THE ACADEMY
WHICH CAN BE EXPENSIVE.
>> SO YOU KNOW, I'D LIKE TO
MAYBE RIGHT NOW I'M TOLD IT'S
NOT A GOOD TIME TO DEAL WITH
ANYBODY WITH THE SCHOOLS.
THEY HAVE PROBLEMS
WITH THIS
NEW SUPERINTENDENT FINDING A
SUPERINTENDENT, SO FORTH AND SO
ON.
BUT IF ANYBODY, YOU KNOW,
HASN'T HAS ANYBODY THAT THEY
KNOW ON THE SCHOOL BOARD YOU
KNOW, I THINK IT BE A GOOD IDEA
FOR US TO AT LEAST BE A
PRESENCE NOT NOT A FORCE BUT A
PRESENCE WITH IT WITH OUR
SCHOOLS TO TRY TRY AND AND GROW
OUR OWN.
OK, THANK YOU COUNCILOR, FOR
FOR THAT UPDATE IN TERMS
OF COMMUNITY NATIONS, DO YOU
HAVE ANYTHING AT ALL MISS
COMMENTS OK AFTER THE MEETING I
WILL NEED TO SEE ALL THE NEW
COMMISSIONERS AND I WILL NEED
TO SEE THE OUTREACH COMMITTEE
THE INPUT WILL YOU MANAGERS AND
THE POLICY COMMITTEE AND THE
TRADE COMMITTEE.
>> SO PLEASE THINK THIS IS NEAT
TO SEE EVERYBODY EVERYBODY.
WE DID GET A COMMUNICATION FROM
COMMISSIONER PIPKINS.
>> SHE'S NOT HERE.
SHE'S HAD A DEATH IN THE FAMILY
AND SO WE CERTAINLY SEND OUR
CONDOLENCES TO HER AND HER
FAMILY AND WISH HER I THINK SHE
WENT OUT OF TOWN SO WISH HER
SAFE TRAVELS.
>> ARE THERE ANY ANYTHING ELSE
THAT ANYONE HAS?
>> COULD I I JUST WANT TO SAY A
COUPLE OF REALLY QUICK THINGS.
ONE IS JUST THAT WHAT A
TERRIFIC MEETING I THOUGHT WE
HAD LAST MONTH, YOU KNOW, WITH
THE PUBLIC FORUM ALONG WITH THE
PUBLIC FORUM AND JUST SO MUCH
ENERGY IN THE ROOM TO HAVE
TWENTY FIVE OR SO I THINK
COMMUNITY MEMBERS VERY ENGAGED.
WE HAD A TERRIFIC DISCUSSION
AND I JUST HOPE WE'LL DO THAT
MORE OFTEN.
WE COULD THINK ABOUT
OPPORTUNITIES TO HAVE TO
COMBINE PUBLIC FORUM WITH OUR
WITH WITH OUR MEETINGS AND GET
MORE INVOLVED WITH THE WITH THE
PUBLIC.
SO THAT'S NUMBER ONE.
NUMBER TWO, I GUESS I JUST I
JUST WANTED TO MENTION I DON'T
KNOW IF COMMISSIONER BILKS
ISN'T HERE TONIGHT BECAUSE
TONIGHT'S THE NIGHT IS BEING
HONORED.
I FORGET EXACTLY HE'S BEEN ON
IT FOR SOMETHING.
I JUST WANTED TO MENTION THAT
UM I THINK HE'S BEEN HONORED
MANY TIMES BUT FOR HIS FOR FOR
HIS FOR HIS TERRIFIC WORK IN
THE COMMUNITY.
SO I JUST WANT TO GIVE A LITTLE
TIP OF THE HAT TO NOW TO
COMMISSIONER ELIPSE AND THEN I
GUESS I ALSO JUST WANT TO SAY
REAL QUICKLY I'M THRILLED WITH
UM WITH OUR COMMISSION HERE.
YOU KNOW, WE ALMOST HAVE A FULL
HOUSE TONIGHT AND UM THE NEW
FOLKS HERE I THINK ARE GOING TO
BRING A LOT OF A LOT OF NEW
ENERGY AND AND DIFFERENT
COMPLEMENTARY SKILLS.
SO SO I WANT TO WELCOME YOU ALL
AND LOOKING FORWARD TO WORKING
WITH ALL OF YOU.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH,
COMMISSIONER GREEN.
MADAM CHAIR, HOW OFTEN DO WE
MEET WITH THE PUBLIC LIKE THAT?
I WAS NOT ABLE TO ATTEND THAT
MEETING AND I REALLY I'M REALLY
REGRET THAT I WAS NOT ABLE TO
BUT THAT KIND OF INVOLVEMENT
WITH THE COMMUNITY HAS GOT TO
BE POSITIVE.
YEAH.
ONE IS THE NEXT MEETING THAT
PLAN WELL WE DON'T HAVE ANOTHER
ONE PLANNED.
>> THAT ONE WAS PLANNED
SPECIFICALLY BECAUSE OF THE
REPORT AND THE NEW ORDINANCE.
BUT I AND IT WAS ON A WEDNESDAY
WHICH I THINK MIGHT HAVE BEEN
MORE PROBLEMATIC FOR SOME
PEOPLE BUT WE PUT IT BUT WE PUT
IT ON A WEDNESDAY BECAUSE THAT
WAS THE ONLY DAY WE COULD HAVE
THAT VENUE.
THEY COULDN'T DO IT ON TUESDAY.
HE'S GOT STUDENTS THAT THAT
COME IN THERE.
SO THAT'S WHY THAT WAS ON A
WEDNESDAY.
BUT I'M HOPING THAT THE
OUTREACH COMMITTEE ONE OF THE
THINGS YOU CAN DO IS THINK
ABOUT HOW CAN WE EITHER FILL
THIS CHAMBER IF OR HAVE IT
SOMEPLACE ELSE?
>> I PERSONALLY THINK MAYBE THE
COMMUNITY WAS MORE RELAXED AT A
DIFFERENT AT A DIFFERENT
LOCATION.
LET'S NOT MAYBE WE CAN WE WOULD
ANY TIME WE CAN DO SOMETHING
LIKE THAT IF IT'S AROUND US
SPECIFIC ISSUE OR YOU KNOW,
WHATEVER I THINK IT'S I THINK
IT WAS GOOD AS WELL.
I I, I ENJOYED IT SO YEAH
THAT'S SOMETHING OUTREACH
COMMITTEE CAN CAN REALLY THINK
ABOUT AND WE COMMEND
COMMISSIONER BILLUPS I DON'T
KNOW WHAT HE GOT OUT OF IT FOR
THIS TIME BUT HE DOES DO SO
MUCH GOOD WORK.
>> YEAH I SHOULD HAVE READ IT
MORE CLOSELY BUT BUT I DON'T I
DON'T THINK THAT TONIGHT IS
NECESSARILY THE NIGHT BUT BEING
ON HONORED FOR SOMETHING SOON
AND I'M I'M SURE IT'S FOR A
GOOD REASON.
>> OK, VERY GOOD.
ANYTHING ELSE?
YES, THERE ARE TWO COMMUNITY
OPPORTUNITIES I THINK
COMMISSIONER YOU ARE SPEAKING
ABOUT COMMISSIONER PHILIP'S
BEING HONORED AT MY BROTHER'S
KEEPERS DINNER THAT'S ON
NOVEMBER 5TH.
YES.
THANK YOU.
YEAH.
AND THEN WHICH IS ALSO THE SAME
AS THE NAACP DINNER SO AND I
NOVEMBER 5TH OF BOTH EVENTS ARE
THE SAME NIGHT BUT THE NAACP
DINNER STARTS AN HOUR BEFORE SO
IF YOU CAN TECHNICALLY MAKE
BOTH IF YOU ARE REALLY GOOD AT
DRIVING BUT GOOD CHOICES, GOOD
CHOICES AND A GOOD WAY TO BE IN
COMMUNITY FOR INTERESTED.
>> OK, VERY GOOD.
>> IF THERE'S NOTHING ELSE CAN
WE HAVE A MOTION TO ADJOURN.
SO MOVE IS THERE A SECOND.
ANY OBJECTIONS ALL IN FAVOR.
ALL WE ARE ADJOURNED.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
YES YOU DO YOU NEED TO SEE ME